Steady death toll underscores Cincinnati's pedestrian safety crisis

Overall pedestrian crashes are the lowest they’ve been in nine years, but community leaders say more work to be done as fatality rate remains constant

Whether it’s rush hour or the middle of the night, there is never a quiet moment on Reading Road. The six-mile stretch of roadway extends from Downtown all the way north of I-275, serving as a major artery for commuters and residents alike. It snakes through Cincinnati’s neighborhoods with multiple lanes and speed limits up to 45 mph, keeping the corridor bustling with the rumble of engines and the blur of passing cars. It is one of the busiest thoroughfares in the city, but the constant hum of traffic also makes Reading Road one of the most dangerous for those on foot. 
It’s where a motorist hit and killed 69-year-old Glenn Scott last May as he walked in a marked crosswalk near Blair Avenue. Just a few miles north in August that same year, 38-year-old Christa Curtis was hit and injured by a car while walking on the sidewalk. This February, another walker suffered injuries after being involved in a crash with a vehicle along Reading Road. 
But it’s not the only place where pedestrians are at risk in Cincinnati. Despite recent decreases in the overall number of pedestrian collisions in the city – last year’s figures were down 13% from 2021 –  Hamilton County remains the third deadliest county in the state for people walking or rolling, according to data from the Ohio State Highway Patrol. Although fewer people may be getting hit by cars, the fatality rate remains unchanged, indicating that those who are hit by cars are just as likely to die as they were before.
From 2018 – 2022, an average of eight people died annually from being hit by a vehicle. So far this year, two fatalities have already occurred. 
The data excludes any deaths that occurred more than 30 days after a crash, which may contribute to a higher overall fatality rate than what's being reported.

What’s behind Cincinnati’s pedestrian fatalities? 
Speeding violations, says Mel McVay, senior city planner with the Cincinnati Department of Transportation and Engineering (DOTE), are the most prevalent factor contributing to pedestrian fatalities. McVay regularly receives and analyzes crash data and reports collected by the Cincinnati Police Department (CPD) to identify patterns and develop strategies for improving pedestrian safety in the city.
“There’s a huge correlation between speed and severity of crash,” McVay says. “It is really dramatic.” 
But even lower speeds that may seem innocuous can kill pedestrians. 
According to an analysis of data from the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA) by MoneyGeek, every 10 mph of increased speed driven doubles pedestrian mortality rates. At an impact speed of 35 mph, 1 in 10 pedestrians die. 
That’s the speed limit on Jefferson Avenue, the street that 18-year-old Cayden Turner was crossing when she was killed in a hit-and-run near the University of Cincinnati’s main campus in September last year. Yet, radar data shows that more than half of the drivers traveling on the corridor exceed that limit. 
Cincinnati City Councilmember and pedestrian safety advocate Mark Jeffreys says that one reason why speeding violations are so common on roadways like Jefferson Avenue and Reading Road is the infrastructure design of the city itself. Wide lanes, limited pedestrian visibility and long, winding stretches without traffic signals or stop signs all contribute to creating an environment where drivers feel comfortable speeding. 
“We’ve designed our roads over the last decades – since the 1950s and ‘60s – many of them as mini highways in our city,” Jeffreys says. “This invites people to dodge between lanes and to go fast, almost like they are on a highway, because it looks and feels like one.”
Felicia Eschenlohr, a College Hill resident for almost 25 years, echoes Jeffreys' sentiment. She knows all too well the dangers of living on a street designed like a highway. North Bend Avenue, the street where she resides, is not much different from Reading Road in terms of its design and high traffic volume. It’s not unusual for her to see cars driving past her house at speeds upwards of 80 mph, she says. 
“We live in a very car-centric community,” Eschenlohr says. “Right now, if people try to cross, you get honked at. I want my son to be able to go pick up a taco and not get run over, that seems like a reasonable request.” 
Eschenlohr serves as a member on College Hill’s community forum and says she has worked closely with the DOTE to implement crash prevention efforts in the neighborhood, such as increased traffic calming signage and more pedestrian visibility in recent years. 
But despite the efforts of Eschenlohr and other community leaders, progress has been slow in making lasting changes to the infrastructure of Cincinnati’s roadways. Many safety initiatives seem to be met with roadblocks as the city struggles to balance the needs of drivers, pedestrians and cyclists. 

Lack of funding, resources, make city slow to implement safety measures
Last year, an unprecedented $8 million was allocated from the city’s budget toward the DOTE’s pedestrian safety projects, says McVay. That money will fund “spot improvements” like speed cushions, raised crosswalks and curb extensions, all of which McVay says have proven successful in reducing driver speeds in dense, urban areas like many of the hotspots for pedestrian deaths tend to be.
Yet, the record amount still falls short of what is needed to fund larger-scale and more long-term improvements to the city's infrastructure. 
“If you want to make safety improvements to a corridor, those tend to be really expensive projects – let’s say upwards of five or six million dollars – which is not money that we receive on an annual basis,” McVay says. 
So, the DOTE heavily relies on federal and state grants to finance more comprehensive approaches such as roadway redesigns and the installation of bike lanes. Projects like these typically take years to go through the lengthy process of application, approval, planning and design before construction can even begin, according to DOTE senior engineer Joe Conway. 
“It’s just a matter of spending the time,” says Conway. “Maximizing those funds requires us to go through this process.” 
Restrictions based on space and Cincinnati’s undulating topography also impact what can be done to make changes to the existing infrastructure, Conway says. 
“Where we would love to be able to have a perfect street in every condition, we’re not starting from scratch. We’re not in a cornfield where you can just knock everything out – there are existing buildings, existing hillsides, existing rock formations.” 
Last year, city council approved a number of legislature aimed at enhancing pedestrian safety on the roads, a significant win for McVay and other leaders at the DOTE. Among these bills was the adoption of a Complete Streets policy, which mandates that transportation officials provide an explanation if they opt not to integrate facilities for vulnerable road users in their road projects. An additional ordinance to create a five-member in-house team dedicated exclusively to installing and upgrading pedestrian infrastructure was also passed. According to Councilman Jeffreys, however, it may take up to six months before the effects of these measures can be observed.  

Other US cities grappling with constant pedestrian deaths
Cincinnati is not alone in experiencing sustained levels of pedestrian deaths persisting since the onset of the pandemic. 
In recent years, Indianapolis has seen a sharp rise in deadly and serious car crashes, pushing city planners and lawmakers to update existing policies to prioritize under-served areas and optimize data tracking methods. 
According to a report from the IndyStar, the number of fatal collisions involving pedestrians and cyclists from 2019 to 2020 doubled from 22 to 44, and the number resulting in serious injury jumped 35%.
Similarly, on the West Coast, San Francisco has also seen a paradoxical increase in pedestrian fatalities even though overall traffic decreased due to the pandemic. In 2020, the city reported 27 pedestrian deaths, up from 20 in 2019.
At the same time, other cities have committed to Vision Zero, a road safety initiative that originated in Sweden and aims to eliminate traffic fatalities and serious injuries. The initiative seeks to a holistic approach to road safety by emphasizing the importance of safe street design, education, and enforcement. Since its inception, Vision Zero has been adopted by over 40 cities in the US. 
In New York City, pedestrian fatalities were down 6.3% last year, defying national trends for the first time in three years. According to its website, the city’s transportation department completed over 1400 intersection improvements and enforced speed cameras 24/7, which led to a 25% decrease in speeding violations. 
Still, some Vision Zero cities like Seattle, Portland, Oregon and Washington, DC are continuing to see traffic deaths rise. Last year, Portland had its highest total in over 30 years. 

Grassroots efforts gaining momentum to change traffic culture 
The inconsistent patterns across the nation only reflect the complexity that city officials and community developers face in juggling the demands of convenience and safety, a feat that Matt Butler says requires a paradigm shift.
Butler is the president of the Devou Good Foundation, a private operating foundation that partners with local nonprofits and organizations to fund research and advocacy programs. 
The foundation’s active transportation campaign designates $3 million toward educational projects and safer infrastructure for people walking and bicycling in the Greater Cincinnati area that can be used by city or county agencies and departments, as well as state or federal agencies working locally.
“We want communities to be able to interface with us with very little barriers,” Butler says. Communities can fill out a form on Devou Good’s website in under an hour to request funding.
The foundation has invested in several projects within the city, including making the protected bike lane on Clifton Avenue permanent and installing pinch points near Rockdale Academy in Avondale to narrow traffic lanes. 
*insert rally photo*
“It’s a uniquely American problem,” Butler says. “We have this disinvestment in transit and aversion to taxes and government oversight. But I think it boils down to lack of education.” 
For Jennifer Foster, a member of the Avondale community council and resident for 15 years, collaboration and anecdotal data will be key in addressing disparities in low-income neighborhoods, such as those traversed by Reading Road.
She says that more communication between the DOTE, city leaders and community councils can go a long way in targeting troubled areas where pedestrians are continually being killed.
“All of it is quantitative data, but we have the people’s point of view,” she says. 
“They’re going to have their shift from nine to five, but we stay here. So we have to work together to make things change. It’s up to us as community leaders to step up and say, ‘let’s work on making some of these things change.”

